---
title: "First post - Master's thesis"
date: 22-03-2024
layout: post
---

This is the **first post** in this site. It will focus on my master's thesis and the workflow around it.

### Background
Initial proposal for my master's thesis came from my supervisor. We had a mutual agreement on the idea that the thesis project should be technical - and that it indeed was. The project was further deepened by the fact that quite early on, partly due to covid, I had a rather straightforward idea of continuing to PhD studies as I were not very optimistic about the environment I was graduating to. Idea thus was to write the thesis so that it could be extended to scientific article that can be published and counts as the first article in my PhD thesis.

Even though I picked pretty much the most technical and math heavy route that forest sciences at University of Helsinki could at the time provide, it became apparent quite fast that if one wishes to produce state of the art works in the remote sensing domain that compare in quality to works from research groups that have more engineering/computer science background you really need to delve deeper into the data/computer science world. In that I think I was very lucky to have supervisor who was himself very technical especially related to remote sensing technologies and methodologies with great expertise in applied physics/statistics in this field. The simple and easier route would’ve been to just utilize ready-made pipelines and have the thesis project just over with fast as possible. This, however, leaves you rather clueless when approaching the next project and forces you to start at zero time and time again.

In hindsight this maybe an overly ambitious project that forced to learn and utilize many new things that were never taught in any course was incredibly useful experience. It laid the foundation on how I currently work on my PhD research and forces you to consider the many pitfalls you face when you really had no idea on how to do a larger project that has many moving parts and specific aims. And all this must be done very rigorously as everything that you produce will be public in the form of thesis, and later in the form of article face the scrutiny of peer review process.

### Topic
The topic was initially just to make up something that could utilize the unique waveform LiDAR datasets that had been collected in 2011 – 2015 period and were never fully analyzed. The Hyytiälä data offered quite unique way to find the research topics that are of interest because of the abundance of data that the site hosts. The aerial imaging and LiDAR campaigns go back to 90s and early 2000s, respectively. The Hyytiälä site also hosts the forest science field courses and other research infrastructure that are mostly available for all researchers. The area is thus very familiar all forest scientists coming from University of Helsinki.

Later the topic was decided, and it turned out to be manifold: see how comparable the repeated LiDAR acquisitions really are when same flight and sensor parameters are enforced, calculate LiDAR WF metrics that are indicative of individual tree properties like species, size, health etc., monitor these metrics and quantify how small of a change can be detected using LiDAR only methods. Change being phenology of trees and health of trees.

### Fun notes about the workflow and some key things to avoid in future
In hindsight I would change quite many things about my thesis work if I could. To begin with I would make great efforts to utilize only one programming language (Python or Matlab) if possible. For various reasons I ended up using Java, Matlab, R and Python in the project, with addition of my supervisor using Visual Basic for his implementations. This made the processing and analyzing very laborious especially when the data management was not done properly.

I used Java/Matlab because the original preprocessing and I/O was based on work of Aarne Hovi back in 2013. I had access to his Java code that was ad hoc implementation to read and write binary files that the LiDAR files were in. This was because of the VB implementation of my supervisor, as his method required (for some reason) the LiDAR to be read as a one-hectare blocks rather than the las/laz format. To be fair, most of that software has been written very early on before las/laz data formats were made the official format for point cloud storages (first released version of las was from 2003 and first Hyytiälä LiDAR campaigns were from 2004). Also, the hardware considerations of having smaller hectare sized binary files might have influenced this. However, whatever the reasons behind this implementation it made initializing the processing chains rather hard as I first had to start working with ten-year-old Java code. Luckily, I was part of the last the basics of programming course that was taught in Java in University of Helsinki (I had no idea I would ever need Java specifically when I completed the course, and it has since been changed to Python) so I had some idea on how to initialize and modify the code to my needs. The further processing and WF attribute calculation was done in Matlab, this too relied somewhat on the work of Aarne Hovi but required quite many changes to run properly on the Riegl data that I was working with. It was, however, nice that the I/O worked properly as both of those were written by Aarne and utilized different schema than pulsewaves as the WF format too was not established back then. I had not previously used Matlab on programming, but I had done some math courses that utilized it. The R was used for segmentation and statistical analysis, and it was quite straightforward. Python was used for initializing the areas of interest and some spatial analytics such as attaching the WF attributes/features to correct segments etc.

Take home message of all of the above is to use only one programming language to run the methods and analysis rather than having this convoluted thing where you need to use one thing first and then switch to use the other thing etc. This leads to chaos when you realize you need to change something in the very beginning of your analysis.
The other main point is to be very rigorous with your data management and use established methods of doing stuff (like data formats). Also always opt for the open-source alternative because, for example Matlab is not accessible. In the future things like Docker for python is a very serious thing to consider when publishing and finishing projects
